the big welcome to Michael Parenti who's
just joined us in studio in fact he's
joined us on the west coast the guy has
actually moved out here you feel like a
Berkeley resident yet her yes look like
a Berkeley resident okay what is a
Berkeley resident look right now
Michael Parenti author of the sword and
the dollar democracy for the few and
here on the west coast he is doing
almost the same thing as you were doing
on the East Coast which was doing a
great job of telling the world that what
we see in our newspapers and on TV and
here on the establishment media is
make-believe frequently or it's an it's
really not the reality when we asked you
what you wanted to talk about this
morning you said capitalism and of
course we all know that capitalism is
responsible for saving the entire planet
from any number of dastardly
possibilities do you want to pontificate
on just what capitalism has meant to you
well I don't want to pontificate but I
would like to just remind people that
capitalism is more than an economic
system it's an entire social order and
when we talk about capitalism we're not
talking about an economy only as such
but a system of class power and that
class power reaches into all the other
major institutions of society so that if
you look most of the other major
institutions the churches the media the
museums the sports teams the hospitals
health industry they're all run by
boards of trustees of the universities
who are who arm and sometimes women but
almost always manned by by by members of
the corporate elites and the very rich
who laid down the major policies for
these institutions all the policies if
they want to and there is an enormous an
enormous oligarchic power a plutocracy
is the
I use in my book democracy for the few
it Pluto cracy means ruled by the rich
and for the rich it doesn't mean that
everyone of the decision makers is a
rich person though eventually they
usually are but that all of them will
serve end up serving the corporate
owning class a Henry Kissinger
originally wasn't rich he's a
multimillionaire now but he he was
plucked out of his academic career his
modest academic career cause he was
writing the kinds of things that David
Rockefeller and Nelson Rockefeller liked
and he was brought up and became a big
policymaker advisor and eventually in
the Nixon administration and that kind
of thing is the way it operates this
this owning class that owns the land
labor the resources the capital the
controls the markets of our country they
don't own the labor they employ the
labor labor power they they also are
largely self recruiting when it comes to
the top decision-making positions so
that the top the president's vice
presidents secretaries of state defense
Treasury and commerce the CIA head the
Federal Reserve had and a few others
like this are almost all members of the
Council on Foreign Relations or the
trilateral commission like mr. Clinton
himself or the Bilderberg conference and
all these are organizations that were
formed by by plutocrats like Nelson
Aldrich and john d rockefeller senior
back in the 20s and 30s and JP Morgan so
there is an a remarkable cohesion of
interest of these people and they
generally rule their their their job is
to keep is to keep the government and
the state especially actively engaged in
in maintaining existing social relations
and class power relations
yeah but the myth the major myth well
there there's an underlying theme which
is if you're so smart why ain't you rich
it's good to be rich but the major myth
is that anybody could be rich this is
that's the nature of capitalism that all
you have to do is be hardware
and you too can be smart there are there
are casein people who do get rich that
way either the agency created how many
new millionaires
well the 80s with the help from Reagan
and the help from a tax policy and a
subsidy policy and a government welfare
for the corporations policy that that
helped a lot there was an awful lot of
that that brought brought much of that
around and there are individuals who
someone who can wiggle their their
anorexic little frame across the stage
like a Michael Jackson you can become a
multi-millionaire if you can hit a
spherical horsehide object three hundred
and fifty feet with any regularity you
get you can get a five million dollar
contract as a baseball store and then
you can use some of that money other
things and if you invent something and
there's some entrepreneurs who still to
this day can sometimes get in on
something and make a million or ten
million whatever they are the notable
exceptions and in any case I'm not
measuring the system by how many of us
can get rich I don't want to get rich I
just want to see the people of the
United States living a decent life
drinking clean water breathing clean air
having jobs living with some measure of
security not in the kind of misery that
exists now they say that thirty four
million people are below the poverty
level those are very cooked figures
because the original poverty line was
calculated almost what was it about 30
years ago where it was a family of four
had to have about $7,000 or something
and what they've done is they've changed
that figure every year according to the
cost of living allowance but the cost of
living index does not take in the fact
that the four major essentials have gone
up vastly higher than the rest of us
goods and services I'm talking about
shelter food food food fuel housing and
health have gone up something like a
hundred percent more than the other
items there's no longer a pollution we
don't talk about a pollution problem as
such we talk about an ecology crises
it's not just a matter of cleaning up
this or that Bay it's a matter of it's a
matter of
determining whether or not the planet
will survive or not survive with ozone
depletion and global warming let me ask
you something there was a a remarkably
revealing article on the front page of
the business section of the San
Francisco Chronicle of all places last
week in which they interviewed three
former CEOs of major corporations and
asked them very specifically who they
primarily worked for and how they could
represent the interests of their
employees and in all three cases they
said well of course we work for the
stockholders our job is to guarantee the
stockholders a maximum return on their
investment dollar so when it comes to
talking about the the benefits the wages
hours benefits of our employees we have
to make the case to the stockholders
that by paying our employees a little
more money that in the long run the
stockholders will benefit because these
employees will be harder working more
diligent more you know all those good
things and then the same week last week
Bank of America announces that they are
going to reduce the hours of all the
tellers at Bank of America which absorbs
security Pacific from full-time people
to 19 hours a week so that they no
longer would have to pay them benefits
right and I'm thinking uh-huh
this is an interesting picture and by
the way Bank of America also reported
record profits 1.5 billion right 1.5
million in profits so it wasn't an
austerity necessity it was rapacity it
was just to to make more and more well
my reading of history could I just could
I just jump back to the Roman Empire for
a minute Phil it's not much of a leap no
okay it's your people okay
thought I should ask your permission
before doing it is reading um I was
reading how in about the first century
BC the Roman aristocracy went after the
I think it was called the agraria plebe
um which was the land owned by where's
me the owned by the please but used by
the plate what we would in this era call
the Commons of the common lands in
England where people where people raised
food and farmed and used the resources
of these lands game whatever else just
as the just that just as the British
financial industrial class wiped out the
British yeoman airy and peasantry and
drove them off the Commons the more
resources that people have and they can
just use directly for their own
sustenance their own themselves
the less is your wealth and power
because you need those people you need
their dependency and poverty to to get
them to work hard for very little so you
can accumulate wealth off their labour
if they're working for themselves if
they're doing okay then that becomes a
potential threat furthermore those were
good lands and I was sitting there on I
was reading and I'm saying what do the
owning what do the ruling classes what
do the owning classes what do the rich
throughout history what do they want and
it came to me like a boat like a
revelation in one word they only want
one thing and that's everything they
want everything if there's any area
where they can squeeze it a little more
and there's nothing no countervailing
power to stop them to squeeze it then
they'll squeeze it
Bank of America employees are not are
not unionized data they don't have
collective bargaining rights they don't
know so you can just treat them like
this you can just cut them off and tell
them to kiss off and that's that's
that's too bad they're listening to
Michael Parenti joining us in studio as
indeed he's joined us on the west coast
the author of many x' the vol democracy
for the few the sword and the dollar and
make-believe media the titles that i
recall without looking at your list that
inventing reality is out in a new
edition finding reality the politics of
news media and i've also just finished a
book last week called well it won't be
out for a while so
but it's called land of idols political
mythology in america if you don't mind i
get up this hour just to be able to make
a plug here
whatever works once again Michael
Parenti our guests speaking of inventing
reality and how this all fits into
capitalism as we've come to know it if
not love it the folks we just spoke to a
last hour with fairness and accuracy in
reporting we're talking about the
spectrum of debate and how there isn't
one and that 45% really of the spectrum
of political debate in this country is
absent from our major media sources what
role does the media play in your version
of capitalism here you've been
describing well I think was pointed out
very well by norman solomon and jeff
cohen your previous guests that the
media are not really free and
independent they're owned by the same
people who are the top decision makers
or who select the top decision makers
and who own the rest of the economy and
so their perspective is one which will
amputate political discourse and the
political spectrum so that the whole
left and progressive viewpoint is not
given any kind of any kind of exposure
and I don't want to reiterate what they
what they just said so well well there
is this notion of course capitalism is
based on this notion of the marketplace
and in the marketplace allegedly the
true value of a commodity or a person's
labor is determined by by competition or
an idea right so then we have the
marketplace of ideas the marketplace of
ideas modeled on the same notion of
capitalism would presume that the better
idea
whatever better means will win out
because it's had to compete with those
inferior ideas mm-hmm that would be okay
with me if the if the ideas that have
been muted and shunted to the side were
allowed to honestly compete but those I
have a lobbyist for ideas frequently
write those ideas don't get on I think
as Mark said that
in every epoch the ruling ideas are the
ideas of the ruling class that those who
control the material means of production
also control the
ideational and intellectual means of
production so that our ideas can get on
a small and valiant radio radio stations
from time to time and in small
circulation magazines but but the mass
market the mass TV the the the markets
that reach not not twenty thousand
people but twenty million people we
can't get on or if we do it's very
limited very irregular and we're facing
three conservatives who are screaming at
us and we can hardly get a word in
so our ideas are really not given fair
play if they were if we could reach
millions of people I noticed for
instance with my tapes which is
circulated by people's video in Seattle
and people I still get calls and letters
from people saying this is amazing
III gee this makes sense I never heard
anything like this before now that's a
very revealing comment I never heard
anything like this before because what I
tell them is not some occult esoteric
knowledge that I gleaned from the
Himalayan mountains I talk about things
that are in the news and all that but
putting them together and giving a level
information that you're just not gonna
usually get well it's making connections
that are not made that there's this
whole which which which man just say
that which points out the point of
making of that capitalism is more than
an economic order it's a whole social
and cultural order and it's a very
controlled order and it's a very in a
sense totalitarian order in that it
doesn't have to have absolute control
over the entire communication universe
all it needs is overwhelming crushing
advantage it doesn't have to control 100
percent but 98 percent will do quite
well and that 2 percent serves as a
legitimating thing you can say see well
you got your radio show another 2
percent right well right you're part of
the 2 percent well this is part of the
whole mythology
is this notion of freedom we think that
we live in the land of the free we have
a free trade we have free markets we
have free ideas
we're free here well free markets and
free trade is freedom for people who
have lots of money in a lot of economic
power that's that's for whom there is
freedom but that's how the 98% is
controlled because they've got this
concept that hey if they wanted to they
could they could do this it's just their
own they blame themselves if they're not
rich
there certainly is that popular
mythology that the millionaire is
self-made you know but people are a
little more complex than that the same
people who will sometimes adhere to
horatio alger also known their gut that
there are people born I mean even my dad
my late dad who was a kind of an Archie
Bunker kind of guy but he used to talk
about those who were born with a silver
spoon in their mouth so they do know
that there is favoritism he used to talk
about how the working man always gets it
in the neck and and and you know with a
last on line and all that sort of thing
so we do have that and the question is
how do you galvanize and and bring that
consciousness to the fore so it's not
just a implicit gripe but it's mobilized
for political action that could bring us
a greater share of social justice I'm
sorry Chris you say we have a president
yeah I was just thinking you know
Clinton is an example of somebody who
rose from poverty to the greatest office
in the land
tell us what your impression is thus far
of what he's doing is he strictly the
servant of the wealthy classes or is
there any mixed message here well I mean
I think it is a it's a bit it's a bit
better than than what we would have had
George Bush I remember coming into this
very station with and saying that I was
gonna hold my nose and vote for Clinton
when I said hold my nose I wasn't being
cute I mean the guy stinks in some ways
and his appointees are some of them are
just terrible the national security
state retreads who are definitely
reflect no new way of thinking about the
world about the third world about u.s.
interventionism about a lot of those
kinds of
there's that problem you got a a
Secretary of Interior Bruce Babbitt
who's should be in jail I mean this is
the guy who did the cover-up on the
murder of the radio journalist Dan bull
when they got the guy who did the
shooting they they they they copped let
him cop a plea and they railroaded two
innocent people his book just out
reviewed in the nation on this and it
was bet it was babbitt who played a key
role in all this covering up what dan
ball was doing dan ball was in arizona
you remember that written he was
uncovering some very powerful interests
in arizona and this guy is now Secretary
of Interior in fact he should be
investigated so you got that kind of
thing going on and you've got and you've
got a few a few little shops to to the
populist movement in the sense he's
gonna increase he's gonna give a minor
increase in corporate taxes but
meanwhile 15 billion dollar and
investment credits to the same business
aliens explain what an investment credit
is well that if they if they invest in
certain things and and and and retooling
and all that they will get that they
will get tax credits for it they will
get not a tax not a tax deduction but
something better than that I mean it's
just cash yeah that they will get it
means you won't get it doesn't mean a
million dollars of your income will not
now be taxed it means a million dollars
of the taxes you had to pay will be
given back to you so that's a million
dollars I mean you you get you get right
great straight money yeah it's gonna be
money and but often what happens is
these companies take it on retooling
that they were going to do anyway they
don't just suddenly then do all sorts of
new things and increase their production
and hire 500 new workers if there's no
market out there to buy these new
refrigerators and all and so so it
really becomes a tax windfall and these
tax create these tax credits and these
these investment credits and all
inducements and so forth they've been
every administration has been handing
those things out and it hasn't it hasn't
led to can I point that that's another
myth about capitalism that is the
self-willed entrepreneur of whom there
are some and who are inventive and who
do
by the way create jobs NOLA and they're
usually very small capital but if you
look at the corporate 500 and the big
corporations they've created very few
jobs in fact they're getting very good
at cutting back thousands tens of
thousands of jobs right before our eyes
but most of their much of their funding
in many industries and whole industries
have not come from their own
resourcefulness and pockets it has come
from the US government whole industries
the telecommunications industry was
built by socialism that is by the by the
public by public subsidy by the from the
person of the taxpayers of America the
Aaron Eric Aeronautics industry I mean
all through World War two after the war
the whole the whole military buildup
from 1948 on the Aeronautics industry
and that included Laurance Rockefeller
and the DuPont's and and and the Morgan
and the JPMorgan groups and so forth
invested in all these areas
General Electric the biggest the biggest
single Aeronautics the biggest single
military contractor in America for
decades they put they put up about ten
percent of the equity the other ninety
percent came from the Pentagon
so you see and and they would always
calculate profits on general costs and
say well it cost this much to make this
bomber and we made just ten percent
profit but if you don't if you put aside
general costs if you don't tell anybody
that ninety percent of those general
costs were picked up by the taxpayer and
you put only ten percent then you didn't
make ten percent profit you may close it
to 100 percent you doubled your
investment or you made fifty percent or
60 percent and that's still going on
today so these very same people who tell
to preach to us on Sunday every Sunday
that we should practice self-reliance we
should not go to the government for a
handout and all that they themselves
through the rest of the week are living
high off the public hog I'm thinking of
two corporations close-to-home Bechtel
and Kaiser both of whom obviously made
their money off of government contracts
from the get its Ross Perot we mentioned
him he also made his billion of course
off government contracts Medicare right
Medicare he took a whole Medicare
system computer system that hadn't
worked out by the government by the US
taxpayer and it was privatized handed
over to him and he it was just a it was
just a license to print money
practically and he made his minions
marketing that and then spends the rest
of his time talking about the rugged
individual private entrepreneur and the
blessings of capitalism there in a
previous interview we did about a week
ago we talked to a man who wrote the
book the lobbyists and he said there are
80,000 lobbyists in Washington DC cut
both in the hill and going after the
executive branch and I was thinking that
if in fact in the marketplace of ideas
the better idea wins out because it's
obviously the better idea then of course
you wouldn't need lobbyists because
lobbyists are in essence influence
peddlers people that try to push a bad
idea down people's throats because
somebody's going to make money off of it
so in essence what kind of system do we
have is it just a bribe taking bribe
giving kind of system is that what we're
talking about here well I think there
are two things there what you're talking
about our issue politics here where
specific issues are pursued by specific
lobbyists for specific advantages
sometimes it's the haves versus the have
you know the trucking industry versus
the airliners or something like that and
but but generally the one group left out
of all that is the broad unorganized
public that our interests generally
aren't aren't represented that's part of
the system the other part of it is the
system as a totality which you might not
call interest politics but class
politics that over and above any one
interest group you need a state which is
a conscious agent for control and and
for doing the things that no one
interest in the society can do for
itself that is I mean the state also has
other functions which are public safety
the ordinary accommodations for any
civilized society but besides that its
other function is to make sure that the
existing property relations and the
existing system of corporate capitalism
will exist this includes sometimes
ignoring the interest
of specific capitalists because they're
pursuing the interest of the total
society for instance those companies
that want to trade with Cuba are
regularly ignored and people say well
you see the corporation's don't run
everything their corporations that want
to trade with Cuba but the US government
won't let them because the US government
the least of that portion the government
known as the state the national security
state its function is not for a
particular corporation to make a killing
in a particular market its function is
to make sure that those systems of
markets are maintained as they are and
that entails rolling back and getting
rid of any kind of country or system
that has an alternative way of of using
land and labour and investment and the
end so they had their eye on the larger
systemic function of the system so we
should make a distinction between
systemic politics or class politics if
you want and on one hand and and
specific issue politics on the other of
course in the specific issue politics is
always a class interest dimension in in
them I'm not denying that there's
overlap I'm hearing echoes of
conversation we had earlier this week
with Noam Chomsky who was pointing out
the possibilities for any real health
care reform and mentioning that the one
way to make sure that single-payer
Canadian style health care did not
become the model for us would be to
destroy the Canadian model by forcing
them to raise the prices of their
pharmaceuticals because it's unfair to
have such low price pharmaceuticals just
across the border from our high price to
pharmaceuticals well that might be one
thing that's going to happen what we
have to do is mobilize a contrary
opinion and point out how the
pharmaceutical industry prices are rate
of what they're going up 20 30 % faster
than inflation itself which means that
their price gouging and I think there
are people in Congress who are attuned
to that and I've even seen one or two
stories in the mainstream media there
are a lot of corporations that want to
see some kind of a change because the
health industry the price gouging and
the profiteering in the health industry
is really incredible
it's become one of the single biggest
costs for corporations with the benefits
for their workers which is why you're
getting something like the Bank of
America knocking off of these people to
get them below fifty percent work week
so they don't have to pay their health
benefits anymore so that what you have
is the the capitalist the capitalist
portion of the health the health
industry is a portion of the capitalist
class cutting into the profits of the
rest of the capitalist class so you're
getting you're actually getting
corporations now saying we need a
different system they're saying it
because they don't want to pay this
anymore
and there's two ways they can do that
one you can get a really good public
support system or two you can just cut
these benefits for your own employees
and the hell with everything and let
them let them sink or swim I'm going
back to that chronicle article where
what who does a CEO of a corporation in
fact work for and obviously it's the
stockholders right given that the CEOs
job is to maximize the profit for the
stockholders then what happens to the
workers in that particular corporation
is totally secondary to that and so if
in fact the the tellers at Bank of
America branches throughout the state
are unorganized they can't go on strike
because they don't have any way of
acting in solidarity with one another
maybe the CEO of whose name I don't even
know of Bank of America is doing his job
when he attacks them based on their
benefits I mean that's what he's paid to
do that's what he's paid to do that's
his job well you're absolutely correct
because his job is not to make a profit
for the stockholders but it is as you
put it to maximize but to make the
maximum amount of profit and if I if I
am making 1.5 billion and I could make
2.3 billion by cutting out all health
benefits cutting back on this and and
and you know when you cut those kind of
hours that means other people are going
to have to work harder you're doing what
is right i David Roderick made that
point in his head of the US Steel now
USX he said the function of us
it was you it was a us X he called you
know when US Steel became us X when I
was a kid in school and I studied
algebra X was an unknown quantity you
know what do we make we make we make X
we make what is X money we just make
money and Roderick made that point he
said USA a US Steel is not in the
business of making steel when I was
still US Steel that's right it's not in
the business of making steel it's in the
business of making and you didn't say
profit is at the highest possible
profits for its stockholders so they'll
sell do they'll do this still do that
they'll do whatever it takes so not only
does the work is interest are secondary
but the workers interests are in fact in
opposition to those of what I have to do
there are interests that have to be
counted and minimized in every way and
attacked I was going to say the workers
interests were irrelevant but they're
totally relevant because the workers
interests are diametrically opposed
liminal right right we're talking with
Michael Parenti and we're just about out
of time and Chris has another question I
can tell by the look on our face well
I'm just I don't understand how I feel
like Rodney King why can't we just get
along I mean you know the workers
interest I would think would be vital to
the continuing and long-lasting health
of the business no I don't just made the
point no the the more I have to pay my
workers the more you're cutting into my
profits because my workers are my source
of profit these are your consumers the
worker contributes yeah but that's way
down the road there'll always be someone
else to buy you're right I mean you know
you lay off these a number of workers
they're gonna have less bank accounts
for Bank of America and they're gonna
have less money to put in to Bank to the
Bank of America so eventually that might
happen but capitalism operates
proportionately always in terms of rates
and ratios and if I can increase my rate
of profit even if I'm way down line
cutting out some portion of my base then
then that's fine with me there's also
the business of short term profit versus
the long run and with all these
leveraged buyouts the long run isn't
even considered I mean if you're macsam
corporation that
bought Pacific lumber up on the north
coast your bills are coming due you're
paying huge interest bills and all that
money you borrowed and you better chop
down every damn tree now or yesterday
because you got to maximize the profit
right does anybody think about the long
run that you know ten years down the
road there's not gonna be a tree to cut
down anymore or is that somebody else's
problem well that's that's the other
myth of capitalism then to how efficient
they are that in fact they dumped their
diseconomies onto the public we are the
ones who have to think about the
unemployed we are the ones who have to
think about about the breadline
districts where people can't even get
decent housing we are the ones who have
to think about the devastated economy
and we have the ones who have to think
about the clean-up on the toxic waste
that they leave behind them they skim
the cream and then the government and
the public has to do the rest and then
they turn around and say you see how
much more efficient we are then
government is but but that's really all
of that is a part of capitalism with
what Clinton's doing now this mess that
he's shoveling out to us now is a
representation of the last 12 years and
the kinds of levels of exploitation that
we have suffered as working people as
taxpayers and as ordinary citizens and
as consumers we get we get exploited and
ripped off in all four of those areas